---
layout: post  
permalink: /embassy/  
title: Italy Is Saying NO to Foreigners
tags: milan  
---

this is a post for recording my storlines with the (inefficient) bureacratic system in Italy.

note that **THE KEY IS TO COMPLAIN**


## Renewal of Permission of Stay

Here's how I didn't get my permission of stay 5 months after my first submission of application.

July 20th 2023. 

My first appointment with the police station (Commissariato Porta Genova) is on July 20th. It's been two weeks after I submitted my application, however they didn't process my material at all. The Mr. Policeman worked on his desktop for a while, couldn't get anything done and instead gave me another appointment that was in August. I told him that I would be in China with my family, he replied saying I would receive message about reschedule. If I was experienced enough back then, I should've realized that he was just pushing things away and didn't want to help in anyway.

September 28th 2023. 

<!--more-->

The mission in the police station is composed with several challenges. The first challenge is the guard. You need sort of valid reasons to convince him so that you can have an opportunity to talk with the staff inside. If he has difficulty communicating with you or he doesn't want to talk with you at all (say I have to explain to him why I didn't come last time), he would do nothing but just say "next appointment" "come tomorrow", and you got kicked out. The point is that "next appointment" is meaningless because you can not do anything like rescheduling online, you have to talk with the guy inside to reschedule officially. So basically he is just asking you to go away. Like, WTF is that?

I learned after the first time. The second time I just stayed there and complained, until he got tired and say "okok just go in".

I got in, the mr. policeman, again worked on his desktop for a while, feeling that he didn't want to do anything on that day. Then gave me another appointment 3 months later -- that's gonna be around Christmas.y


January 26th 2024.

Of course I couldn't go on Christmas because I was spending vacation with my family in China . Today I went to the police station to ask for a new appointment, however I failed in the guard challenge. Feeling didn't understand what I said, this time, the guard gave me a number saying I could call to reschedule. My colleague helped me to call but the lady from the other side said they are not responsible for this issue -- I got the wrong number. 

January 29th 2024.

Relized that I was tricked again, today I went again. The guard challenge was always awful, after arguing with the guard even though we don't understand each other's language (instead, with your affirmative attitude!), and he didn't wanted to see what I typed on google translation, he let me in.  

Here's the funny part, the mr. policeman started to look at material, didn't look happy when he saw that my appointment on receipt was on July but haven't got things done. Then I made a wrong move -- I showed him my prepared message on google translation :" Dear Sir, I missed my last appointment because I was in my home country, today I come to reschedule my appointment. Can you give me a close date because I need my permit for travel." He looked relieved after reading this, the face was like "oh you just want to reschedule? nice I don't have to work on anything".  He then looked very happy and issued another appointment that is one month later.

Maybe he would have got my things done if I didn't show him the message.




## Getting Visa for Family Members

June 19th 2023

As Chinese it's already annoying enough to obtain a visa to enter any western country, however when the Italian embassy gets involved, things become exponentially harder.

Italian wants to be decent, everything needs to be formally addressed. One problem: even the office staff don't understand the business.

My family wants to visit me in the summer. To help my family to get a visa, I need to obtain a certificate of relationship for them. 

Problem 1: even this certificate is not clearly defined, you cannot find any format of this certificate on the website.

Problem 2: they do not specify who would authorize the document.

So I went to the Chinese embassy in Milan to obtain a certificate, which was reasonable because all my documents are in Chinese so they can recognize and verify. After weeks of effort, finally my family received the certificate and submitted it to the Italian embassy, and they said: we cannot acknowledge your document (because we don't trust the Chinese embassy), we need an authorization from the Italian side. "

Then you ask them: WHERE in Italy should I go to obtain the authorization. They respond: we don't know, but our boss explicitly required that. Perhaps in comune di Milano or the Prefettura, you know, someone came here last week with that authorized document so it's not impossible...

Problem 3: you cannot directly talk to the officer who has the authority to issue your visa, but you can only talk to the one who helps you to communicate. They even create a GAP in your communication, and you cannot ask directly what you need!


Problem 4: when I went to the comune di Milano and the Prefettura, apparently they don't know what the Italian embassy staff is talking about...

So you are just kicked back and forth among these authorities.




TO BE UPDATED